gh-121607: Edited source file import recipe to make it more clear (#121519)
python/cpython: Doc/library/importlib.rst

Importing a source file directly
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> ``SourceFileLoader.load_module()`` has been deprecated -- this recipe should be used instead.

Reviewer: This should be changed to be a warning about the recipe and to consider alternatives before using it.

Author: I really don't feel qualified to write that warning -- I suppose I could take some of @ncoghlan's note above and try, but maybe someone else could propose text.

FWIW, I guess ncoghlan's note is why this is a recipe in the docs, and not a function in importlib, but I DO think this is a useful thing to do -- yes, i suppose a bit of a foot gun, but still useful.

In regards to the potential double import problem, in this case of the json module - yes, using the recipe for something on the import path is a bad idea, for sure -- that's only there to provide a example that can be run -- I borrowed that from the existing docs, but maybe it would be better to not provide a runnable example, and rather something like:

`my_mod = import_from_path("my_mod", "path/to/a_python_file.py")`

For the use-case that got me here, I'm using Python as a configuration definition -- yes, very dangerous if you are getting the config from an untrusted source, but that's not the case here (internal data analysis tool) -- and I very much do want a module, not a dict of a namespace.

I think this would be very useful for, e.g. a scriptable application as well, so users could provide external python scripts that could be run.

But, as @ZeroIntensity said, this is already in the docs -- I'm just trying to make it a bit more clear.

Reviewer 2: > I think this would be very useful for, e.g. a scriptable application as well, so users could provide external python scripts that could be run.

In most cases, `runpy` can do that, but that's beside the point anyway.

Reviewer: You can take what I outlined as what should be in the paragraph and just write better prose:

>  I think it would be better to have a sentence or paragraph pointing out that the recipe is an approximation of an import statement where you specify the file path. It should also point out that modifying sys.path may be better than circumventing the import system or using runpy.run_path() if you just need the global namespace and not a module object.

To import a Python source file directly, use the following recipe::

    import importlib.util
    import sys

    def import_from_path(module_name, file_path):
        spec = importlib.util.spec_from_file_location(module_name, file_path)
        module = importlib.util.module_from_spec(spec)
        sys.modules[module_name] = module
        spec.loader.exec_module(module)
        return module

    # For illustrative purposes only (use of `json` is arbitrary).
    import json
    file_path = json.__file__
    module_name = json.__name__

>     # Similar outcome as ``import json``.

Reviewer 2: Let's keep the formatting consistent inside the comments.
```suggestion
    # Similar outcome as `import json`.
```

Importing a source file directly
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> .. note:: ``SourceFileLoader.load_module()`` has been deprecated -- this recipe should be used instead.

Reviewer: Why the extra note? The method isn't used here and it's documented as deprecated, so why call it out here and add a visible callout in the rendered docs that some might find distracting?

Author: I did that because the advice to use `SourceFileLoader.load_module()` is found all over the internet (e.g. https://krbnite.github.io/How-to-Import-a-Python-Module-from-an-Arbitrary-Path/)
-- and it *seems* a lot simpler than this recipe, and it doesn't raise a deprecation error. so I thought it would be helpful to make it clear why the more complex recipe is preferred. 

I removed the `note` directive to make it less distracting.

That being said, while it might be helpful now, it'll be clutter in the future -- so your call if you want to simply remove it.

Reviewer 3: I think having a lead-in paragraph makes sense, but I think it's pointing at the wrong alternative: the reason importing an arbitrary path is a bad idea is because it's a good way to confuse the import system, and that's why the stdlib's only shorthand API for doing that is deprecated without a straightforward replacement.

The example given uses a top level module/package, so it's potentially OK (although I'm not 100% certain without checking the code for `module_from_spec` - if that bypasses `sys.modules`, you might end up with two different versions of `JSONDecodeError` kicking around, which can easily land you in exception handling hell), but if the file is part of an already importable package than you're far more likely to get some weird state duplication going on (it's a good way to get yourself caught in the ["double import trap"](https://python-notes.curiousefficiency.org/en/latest/python_concepts/import_traps.html#the-double-import-trap)).

The much safer alternative for executing a Python file and getting access to its top-level module state is to use `runpy.run_path` (which returns the global namespace that results from executing the file rather than creating a module object).

In my experience, folks wanting to import from arbitrary paths is usually a classic case of the "XY problem": "X" is "I want to run a Python file from a Python program and get access to the resulting global variables", which becomes the "Y" question of "How do I import a Python module given only its path name?". With `import` being a statement, and the `execfile` builtin ancient history, it's an understandable leap for people to make, but that doesn't mean it's correct when there's no actual *need* to create a module object at all (let alone register it with the import system).

Reviewer: > it doesn't raise a deprecation error

... yet. 😉 https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/121604

> I did that because the advice to use `SourceFileLoader.load_module()` is found all over the internet

So is probably outdated Python 2 advice, but that doesn't mean we need to call it out. 😉

> I think having a lead-in paragraph makes sense, but I think it's pointing at the wrong alternative: the reason importing an arbitrary path is a bad idea is because it's a good way to confuse the import system

I agree. I think it would be better to have a sentence or paragraph pointing out that the recipe is an approximation of an `import` statement where you specify the file path. It should also point out that modifying `sys.path` may be better than circumventing the import system or using `runpy.run_path()` if you just need the global namespace and not a module object.

Reviewer 2: FWIW, this is already [in the docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/importlib.html#importing-a-source-file-directly)! All this PR does is clean up the snippet a little bit.

> This recipe should be used with caution: it is an approximation of an import statement where the file path is specified directly, rather than :data:`sys.path` being searched.
> Alternatives should first be considered, such as modifying :data:`sys.path` when a proper module is required, or using :func:`runpy.run_path` when the global namespace resulting from running a Python file is appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This recipe should be used with caution: it is an approximation of an import
statement where the file path is specified directly, rather than
:data:`sys.path` being searched. Alternatives should first be considered first,
such as modifying :data:`sys.path` when a proper module is required, or using
:func:`runpy.run_path` when the global namespace resulting from running a Python
file is appropriate.
```

To import a Python source file directly, use the following recipe::

    import importlib.util
    import sys

    def import_from_path(module_name, file_path):
        spec = importlib.util.spec_from_file_location(module_name, file_path)
        module = importlib.util.module_from_spec(spec)
        sys.modules[module_name] = module
        spec.loader.exec_module(module)
        return module

>     # For illustrative purposes a name and file path of an
>     # existing module is needed -- use the json module
>     # as an example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # For illustrative purposes only (use of `json` is arbitrary).
```

    import json
    file_path = json.__file__
    module_name = json.__name__

>     # equivalent of ``import json``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Similar outcome as ``import json``.
```

>     json = import_from_path(module_name, file_path)

Author: I included this example because there had been a similar one in the previous version.

However, it is (always?) a bad idea to use this recipe to import a module on sys.path, particularly an stdlib one -- so maybe better to simply not provide a runnable example?

I expect the code itself is clear enough on how it can be used.

Importing a source file directly
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> This recipe should be used with caution: it is an approximation of an import statement where the file path is specified directly, rather than `sys.path` being searched.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This recipe should be used with caution: it is an approximation of an import statement where the file path is specified directly, rather than :data:`sys.path` being searched.
```

> Alternatives should first be considered, such as modifying `sys.path` when a proper module is required, or using `runpy.run_path()` when the global namespace resulting from running a Python file is appropriate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatives should first be considered, such as modifying :data:`sys.path` when a proper module is required, or using :func:`runpy.run_path` when the global namespace resulting from running a Python file is appropriate.
```
